DOCS-6594 WebSockets Connector (#464)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: modules/ROOT/pages/websocket/websocket-connector-config-topics.adoc

= WebSocket Additional Configuration Information - Mule 4
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:imagesdir: ../../assets/images/

== Configure WebSocket Server

> If your app exposes a WebSocket inbound endpoint, you need to set that up using thhe `<ws:server-settings>` element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your app exposes a WebSocket inbound endpoint, you need to set that up using the `<ws:server-settings>` element.
```

> Because WebSocket connections are initiated with an HTTP Request, exposing a WebSockets inbound endpoint requires pointing to an underlying HTTP listener configuration. This not only allows you to reuse all the available features and configurations of an HTTP listener (such as host, port, TLS, etc.), it also allow your app to expose both WebSockets and regular HTTP endpoints using the same port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because WebSocket connections are initiated with an HTTP Request, exposing a WebSockets inbound endpoint requires pointing to an underlying HTTP listener configuration. This not only allows you to reuse all the available features and configurations of an HTTP listener (such as host, port, TLS, etc.), it also allows your app to expose both WebSockets and regular HTTP endpoints using the same port.
```

       <websocket:server-settings
         listenerConfig="httpListenerConfig" 
         listenerBasePath="/ws" 
         idleSocketTimeout="1" 
         idleSocketTimeoutUnit="HOURS">
    </websocket:connection>
</websocket:config>
----

By default, all inbound sockets have an idle timeout of 15 minutes.

== Configure WebSocket Client

If your application needs to connect to external WebSocket services, provide the client settings element:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<websocket:config name="wsClient">
    <websocket:connection>
       <websocket:client-settings 
         host="localhost" 
         port="80" 
         basePath="/ws" />
    </websocket:connection>
</websocket:config>

<flow="connectToWebSocketFlow">
    <websocket:open-outbound-socket 
      path="/chat" 
      socketId="myCustomWebSocketID-123" 
      config-ref="wsClient" />
    </websocket:open-outbound-socket>

    <logger info="INFO" message="Opened connection to external service!"/>
</flow>
----

In this example we have initialized an outbound socket which references the WebSocket client configuration ("wsClient") in the config-ref attribute. In this case, there is no need to reference an HTTP configuration.

> In the configuration above, we chose to specify a host, port, and basePath to build the WS request URI. The host parameter is optional, if not set, it is set to `localhost`. The port parameter is optional, if not specified, the default value is set according to the protocol scheme: the default for WS is 80, the default for WSS is 443. The basePath parameter is optional, if URI is not set, it indicates the base path for all client requests relative to the indicated host and port, if not set the default value will be set to `/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the configuration above, a `host`, `port`, and `basePath` are specified to build the WS request URI. The `host` parameter is optional; if not set it is set to "localhost". 

The `port` parameter is optional; if not specified the default value will be set according to the protocol scheme. If WS is used, the default value is set to `80`. If WSS is used, the default is set to `443`. 

The `basePath` parameter is optional; if the URI is not set, it will indicate the base path for all client requests relative to the indicated host and port. If the `basePath` parameter is not set, the default value is set to `/`.
```

You can also specify a URL:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<websocket:config name="wsClient"> 
    <websocket:connection>
       <websocket:client-settings uri="ws://www.mulesoft.com" />
    </websocket:connection>
</websocket:config>
----

> However, in this case we cannot indicate a path because the URL and Path parameters are mutually exclusive, this is because URL indicates a full resource locator, while the Path indicates a path relative to the host, port, and basePath.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in this case a path cannot be indicated because the `URL` and `path` parameters are mutually exclusive. This is because URL indicates a full resource locator, while the path indicates a path relative to the host, port, and basePath.
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<websocket:config name="wsServer"> 
    <websocket:connection>
       <websocket:client-settings 
         host="localhost" 
         port="${listenerPort}"
         basePath="/ws"
         connectionIdleTimeout="1"
         connectionIdleTimeoutUnit="HOURS" />
    </websocket:connection>
</websocket:config>
----

By default, outbound sockets have no idle timeout. However, the remote service they connect to is likely to have one.

=== Combined Configuration

If your app is doing both listening for incoming connections and issuing requests to external services, you can configure server and client together:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<http:listener-config 
   name="httpListenerConfig" 
   basePath="/willBeOverriddenByWSConfig">
   <http:listener-connection host="0.0.0.0" port="${listenerPort}" />
</http:listener-config>

<websocket:config name="ws">
    <websocket:connection>
       <websocket:server-settings 
         listenerConfig="httpListenerConfig" 
         listenerBasePath="/ws" />
       <websocket:client-settings 
         host="localhost" 
         port="80" 
         basePath="/ws" />
    </websocket:connection>
</websocket:config>
----

> Now we can reference this configuration from both inbound and outbound sockets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now this configuration can be referenced from both inbound and outbound sockets.
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<flow="acceptIncomingMessagesFlow">
    <websocket:inbound-listener path="/quotes" config-ref="ws" />
    <logger info="INFO" message="I listen for incoming messages at '/quotes'!"/>
</flow>

<flow="connectToWebSocketFlow">
    <websocket:open-outbound-socket path="/chat" config-ref="ws"/>
    <logger 
      info="INFO" 
      message="Open a connection to an external service listening at path '/chat'!"/>
</flow>
----

=== TLS Configuration

TLS (Transport Layer Security) allows for client and server apps to communicate through a secure channel and prevent attackers from eavesdropping or tampering with the transmitted data.

In the case of the WebSocket server, TLS configuration is inherited from the referenced HTTP listener configuration, for example, to configure TLS on a WebSocket listener, point to `<http:listener-config>` with TLS configured.

> You first need to set up your trust store if your application connects to external services, a key store if your application listens for incoming connections, or you can set up both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You first need to set up your truststore if your application connects to external services, or a keystore if your application listens for incoming connections, or you can set up both.
```

In the following example, the WebSocket server inherits its TLS configuration from the HTTP listener, which in turn references  `<tls:context>` to configure a key store:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<tls:context name="listenerTlsContext" >
    <tls:key-store 
      path="tls/muleKeystore" 
      keyPassword="mulepassword" 
      password="mulepassword" 
      alias="muleserver" />
</tls:context>

<http:listener-config name="listenerTlsConfig">
    <http:listener-connection 
      protocol="HTTPS" 
      host="localhost" 
      port="${listenerPort}" 
      tlsContext="listenerTlsContext"/>
</http:listener-config>

<websocket:config name="requestConfigWithCertificate">
    <websocket:connection>
        <websocket:server-settings 
         listenerConfig="listenerTlsConfig" 
         listenerBasePath="/"/>
    </websocket:connection>
</websocket:config>
----

> In case of a WebSocket client, you can set up a trust store by directly referencing the <tls:context> in the `tlsConfig` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of a WebSocket client, you can set up a truststore by directly referencing the <tls:context> in the `tlsConfig` property.
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<tls:context name="requestTlsContextWithCertificate" >
    <tls:trust-store path="tls/trustStore" password="mulepassword" />
</tls:context>

<websocket:config name="requestConfigWithCertificate">
    <websocket:connection>
        <websocket:client-settings 
         host="localhost" 
         port="${listenerPort}" 
         tlsContext="requestTlsContextWithCertificate" 
         protocol="WSS"/>
    </websocket:connection>
</websocket:config>
----

> The protocol parameter is optional and defaults to WS (insecure). If set to `WSS`, then SSL is enabled in the connection. If  `<tls:content>` was specified, then that configuration is used to create the SSL session. Otherwise, default settings are used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `protocol` parameter is optional and defaults to WS (insecure). If set to `WSS`, then SSL is enabled in the connection. If `<tls:content>` was specified, then that configuration is used to create the SSL session. Otherwise, default settings are used.
```

== Next

Now that you have completed configuration, you can try out the WebSocket xref:websockets/websocket-connector-examples.adoc[Examples].

== See Also

> * https://help.mulesoft.com[MuleSoft Help Center]

Reviewer: Update links (folder is websocket)

* xref:4.1@mule-runtime::tls-configuration.adoc[Configure TLS with Key Stores and Trust Stores]

> * xref:websocket/websocket-connector-get-started.adoc[About WebSocket Connector]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:websocket/websocket-connector.adoc[About WebSocket Connector]
```
